In the next 60 minutes or so, I'm going
to teach you everything you need to know
about getting your website ranking on
Google and [music] showing up in AI
search results, even if you're a
complete beginner. [music]
And at the end, I'll give you a 30-day
action plan, so you know exactly what to
do when this video ends. This video will
be very comprehensive, so feel free to
watch in multiple settings or go
straight to the sections most relevant
to you via the timestamps in the
description. Okay, so first we have to
address the elephant in the room. AI
chatbots are answering questions, AI
overviews are taking over Google, and
everywhere you look, someone is claiming
SEO is dead, for real this time. So, if
you're wondering whether SEO is still
worth your time, I mean, that's a fair
question, but here are the facts. Google
still processes billions of searches
every single day. That number grew 20%
last year, and Google sends 190 times
more traffic to websites than ChatGPT.
Google is not shrinking, but the way
people find information is changing.
There are now two places your business
needs to show up, traditional search and
AI-powered search. This video covers
both. And here's something the folks
selling expensive GEO services don't
want you to know. Those AI assistants,
they're built on top of traditional
search infrastructure. ChatGPT uses
Bing's index when it searches the web.
Perplexity runs its own crawler, but
still leans heavily on Bing's index
underneath. Even the ones building their
own indexes, like Perplexity, are
crawling the same pages that already
rank in traditional search. So, if your
site doesn't show up in Google or Bing,
there's a good chance it's invisible to
AI assistants, too. SEO is not competing
with AI search, it's the foundation AI
search is built on. Learning SEO means
learning to show up everywhere, and by
the end of this video, you'll have
everything you need to do just that.
Chapter one, what SEO actually is. SEO
has historically stood for search engine
optimization, but as of late, I'm much
more inclined to Ashley Laddell's
definition, search everywhere
optimization. In a sentence, SEO is
getting your website to show up wherever
people search for things related to your
business or the solutions you provide.
That's it. Everything else is details.
Uh admittedly, there are a lot of
details. Google search works in three
steps. Crawl, index, and rank.
Crawling is when Google sends automated
bots to read every page on the internet,
or at least the vast majority of them.
They follow links from page to page,
reading everything they find in code.
Indexing is the process of Google
storing what those bots find in a
massive library, its index. If your page
isn't in the index, it can't show up in
search results, simple as that.
And lastly, ranking. When someone
searches, Google looks through its index
and picks the results it thinks are the
most relevant, most trustworthy, and
most useful. The order that it puts them
in, that's the ranking, and that is what
we're trying to influence. Now, let me
show you what a search results page
actually looks like right now. At the
top, you might see an AI overview. This
is relatively new in Google's history,
Google's AI summarizing an answer
directly in the results. Below that,
sponsored ads, then the organic results,
the ones you can earn through SEO. Over
here, people also ask boxes, sometimes
you'll see video carousels, a local map
pack if the search has a location angle,
or knowledge panels. Basically, we've
come a long way from 10 blue links,
and our SEO strategy needs to reflect
that. So, how does SEO directly impact
your business? Well, I think it's
important to clarify, you shouldn't
ultimately have an SEO goal. You should
have a business goal, more customers,
more revenue, more leads. SEO is one of
the most reliable ways to get there,
because you're reaching people at the
exact moment they're looking for what
you sell. I mean, think about it, when
you're on your phone, scrolling
Instagram, and you see an ad, you're
interrupted. You were in the middle of
doing something, and someone showed you
their ad. Someone who Googles "best
proposal software for agencies" is
actively looking for a solution. They
have a problem, they want answers. Now,
SEO puts your business in front of them
at that moment. Hopefully.
The difference is intent, and that's
what makes SEO so valuable. Now, to make
this real, I'm going to look at three
different businesses throughout the
course of this video, a SaaS company
that sells proposal software, an
e-commerce brand that sells specialty
coffee, and a managed cybersecurity
platform that protects small and
mid-size businesses. Because, despite
what you may have heard, SEO is not a
one-size-fits-all strategy. The mindset,
workflows, and principles are the same,
but the decisions you make change
completely depending on your business.
I'll show you what I mean throughout the
video. So, I've run dozens and dozens of
SEO campaigns for clients, and before I
make a single change on the website, I
always ask one key question. What are
people actually searching for, and what
do they want when they search it? That
second part is so important that it gets
its own chapter.
Chapter two, mastering search intent.
Before we get into keyword research,
tools, or any tactics, you need to
understand the single most important
concept in SEO, and it's called search
intent. So, every time someone types
something into Google, they're looking
for something specific, and your job is
to figure out what that is and give it
to them.
Broadly speaking, there are four types
of intent. Let's look at a few example
keywords.
"How to train your puppy." This is
informational. They want to learn
something.
"Best dog training classes." This is
commercial. They're willing to spend
money to solve their problem, but
they're not quite sure what they want to
buy. They're comparing options. Next,
"dog training class near me sign up."
This is transactional. They're willing
to spend their money, they know the
broad category of the thing they want to
spend their money on, and they're ready
to buy.
Lastly, "PetSmart dog training." This is
navigational or branded intent, either
one works. The sale is as good as one.
They're basically just using Google as a
digital Uber driver to take them to the
brand's website. So, how do you figure
out search intent? It's actually super
simple. You just Google your keyword,
and you look at what's ranking. That's
what Google thinks the intent is. Now,
Google has already done the research for
you. The top 10 results are Google
telling you exactly what this searcher
wants, and your job is to match that
intent and do [music] it better than
anyone else. By the way, SERP is just an
acronym for search engine results page.
Every keyword has their own, and due to
a variety of factors, they change quite
a bit.
Now, quick rule of thumb. The shorter
the keyword, usually the more
competitive, higher volume, and less
useful it is. For example, take the
keyword coffee. Over 650,000 searches in
a month in the US alone. It sounds
awesome. But Google doesn't know what
the heck you want. The SERP is a mess,
shops, definitions, news, brands, every
major site on the internet is competing
for it.
What do you want?
What do you want? It's not that simple.
>> What do you want? Now, try "best dark
roast coffee beans for espresso."
[music]
It's a lower volume, maybe a few hundred
searches a month, but man, look at that
SERP. All comparison posts and buying
guides, the intent is crystal clear. The
competition, it's a fraction of what
coffee attracts. Now, SEOs call these
long-tail keywords, longer, more
specific phrases. They've got lower
volume individually, but the intent is
focused. The competition is very
manageable. And taken together, they can
send your site a respectable amount of
traffic. Now, if your site is newer,
this is where you start. You build
authority on the long-tail keywords, and
then you work your way up to the big
ones as the business requires. But, I'm
getting ahead of myself, we're going to
talk a lot about keyword research and
prioritization later in the video. For
now, I want you to do something. I want
you to pause this video, or just open
another tab while you're watching, and
Google your main keyword, the thing that
you want your customers to know you the
most for, and look at the top results.
What type of content is ranking? Blog
posts, product pages, tools, YouTube
videos? That's the intent. Now, remember
that, it'll come in handy later in the
video. Now, let's talk about intent in
the AI era. So, AI overviews aren't just
showing up for informational queries
anymore. Google's AI now summarizes
results across all types of searches,
including commercial and transactional.
That means even when someone is
comparing products or ready to buy,
Google might answer them before they
click a single link. This is called
zero-click marketing, and it's got
consumers making entire buying decisions
completely outside of your brand's
ecosystem. So, your content needs to go
deeper than whatever that summary covers
to earn the click. Surface-level content
will not cut it anymore, and we'll talk
way more about how to create content
like that in the chapter on content
creation and on-page optimization. So,
now that you understand intent, let's
move on to the lifeblood of any SEO
strategy, keywords.
Chapter three, finding the right
keywords. So, as we've covered, a
keyword is the phrase someone types into
Google. Doesn't matter how many words it
is, by the way. Keyword can be one word,
five words, 10 words, 20 words. In fact,
I don't even really think there's a
limit. I think you could probably paste
a whole essay into Google.
But, that's beside the point. Your job
is to figure out which phrases matter
for your business, and then build pages
that rank for them. But, not all
keywords are created equal. I use a
framework I call the keyword sweet spot.
Four attributes that make a keyword
worth targeting. The first is demand.
Are people actually searching for this?
If nobody's Googling it, ranking number
one has little benefit. See, I've worked
with many clients who have ideas that
they feel are important to their
audience, which is certainly valuable
from a thought leadership perspective.
Just don't expect to get a ton of
organic traffic to those topics. The
second is fit. Where does the keyword
sit in your funnel? Is it someone just
learning about the topic or someone
ready to buy? Is it relevant enough to
the products or services you're offering
or the audience you're reaching? Each of
these can be valuable, but you need to
know which one you're dealing with. The
next attribute is intent. You already
understand this from the last chapter.
What does the searcher actually want,
and can you satisfy that want? If that's
a YouTube video, which are very common
appearances in the modern SERP, well,
you better get your Tarantino on because
you're going to need to film a YouTube
video if you want to rank. Lastly, we
have keyword difficulty. Can you
realistically rank for this given your
site's current authority? A brand new
website is not going to outrank Amazon
for running shoes, but it might have a
fighting chance for a less competitive
keyword like best running shoes for flat
feet in winter. You won't always find
keywords that score highly on all four
metrics. In fact, sometimes they can be
unicorns, but if you do find those
keywords, you should absolutely
prioritize ranking for them. So, let me
show you how this works in practice with
two real companies.
PandaDoc sells proposal software. The
keyword contract template gets
approximately 300,000 searches a month.
Now, nobody who's searching that is
buying proposal software today, at least
not likely. Conventional wisdom would
say, "Skip it." But, PandaDoc
consistently ranks highly for contract
template. Their template directory
drives hundreds of thousands of visits
every month, and here's the play. Watch
this. Free template download, email
capture, nurture sequence, product
sign-up. That top of funnel keyword
feeds their entire pipeline. Now,
contract template is not a bad keyword.
It's just a top of funnel keyword, and
it's brilliant if you have a plan for
what happens after someone lands on the
page.
And by the way, if you ever need a dog
breeding contract template, apparently,
PandaDoc's got you covered. Now, look at
Counter Culture Coffee. The keyword pour
over coffee has around 34,000 searches a
month. Now, does Counter Culture get a
lot of immediate purchases from that
keyword?
Maybe. Probably not, though.
Those people could be looking for pour
over coffee near them or trying to
understand what it is or how to do it.
Counter Culture gets this, and they
don't try to target that keyword with a
conversion focused page. Instead, they
rank high for that keyword with a brew
guide on their blog. They also rank
highly for pour over coffee ratio at
10,000 searches, as well as cold brew
ratio at 6,800 and coffee brewing
methods at 5,200.
All educational content. They became an
authority in specialty coffee through
tutorials, thus building trust, and the
product sales followed.
>> [music]
>> And the important thing to know is where
each keyword sits in your funnel, and to
have a strategy for that particular
stage. A keyword without a conversion
path is just wasted traffic. It's vanity
metrics. A keyword with a conversion
path could be an automated pipeline for
your business. Okay, so how do we,
number one, identify the terms our
target customers are searching for, and
number two, evaluate them against the
keyword sweet spot framework? So, I like
to break up the keyword research process
into three separate disciplines to keep
things nice and organized. Number one,
keyword ideation. Number two, keyword
validation. And number three, keyword
clustering. Now, there are so many ways
to find keyword ideas. If I explained
all of them, this video would be three
hours long. So, I'm going to rapid-fire
through some techniques, and you should
feel free to pause or rewind the video
as you try them yourself. Now, if you
already have it set up, Google Search
Console is by far your single best
source of keyword ideas. It shows you
exactly what people are searching for to
find your site straight from Google's
own data. You simply cannot get more
[clears throat] accurate than this.
Start typing your topic into Google and
watch what it suggests. Those are real
searches real people are making right
now. Every people also ask box on Google
is a keyword goldmine. Click one, more
appear, and you can mine a dozen content
ideas in minutes.
Scroll to the bottom of any Google
results page, and you'll find a section
called people also search for. This is
Google literally telling you what else
people search for around your topic. You
can find the subreddits where your
customers hang out and read how they
describe their problems. That language
is often the exact phrasing they type
into Google. You can paste your sitemap
URL into ChatGPT and ask it to identify
content gaps. [music]
It'll cross-reference your existing
pages against what a site like yours
should cover. You can also paste a
competitor sitemap in and see what
they're covering that you are not. You
can ask an AI assistant, "Give me 30
questions someone would ask before
buying your [music] product category."
You'll get a seed list in 15 seconds
that would have taken 20 minutes to
brainstorm alone. Now, Surfer also has a
completely free Chrome extension called
Keyword Surfer. Install it, and you'll
see search volume, CPC, and related
keyword ideas right inside Google every
time you search. I don't leave home
without it. Now, any of these methods
will give you tons of ideas. But, ideas
are cheap, and they may not even be a
good fit for your business, which is
where step two, keyword validation,
comes into play. So, keyword validation
is the process of taking all these
keyword ideas that we've curated,
assessing their search volume,
difficulty, business fit, and intent,
and figuring out which to target first
to best benefit your business.
If this is the first you're hearing
about this process, I have very good
news for you, dear reader. You have
entered SEO at the perfect time. The
same AI technology that people think is
killing SEO has made keyword validation
and clustering and research, for that
matter, dramatically faster and easier.
What used to take days now takes
minutes.
So, there are two ways to do this. The
DIY route is to connect an SEO data API
to an AI coding tool and have it pull
search volumes, difficulty scores, and
intent classifications for you. It takes
some technical setup, but it's the
cheapest option if you're comfortable
tinkering. Now, if you'd rather skip the
setup entirely, Surfer handles keyword
validation in one screen. You simply
paste your keywords in, you get search
volume, difficulty, and intent without
touching an API. Now, either way, once
you've validated your keywords, the next
step is organizing them. Because a giant
spreadsheet of keywords, even validated
keywords, really doesn't do you much
good if they're not organized or
prioritized. Now, keyword clustering,
step three, is the process of taking
keywords that naturally belong together,
either because they're topically related
or because Google regards them as
meaning the same thing, and grouping
them. Surfer's keyword research
automates this for your entire website.
You just enter a seed topic, and it maps
out every cluster you should be covering
with pre-grouped keywords you can start
writing about straight in the content
editor. While keyword targets for
Counter Culture, PandaDoc, and Huntress
will likely all have very different
intent ratios, the next step is the
same, no matter what kind of business
you're in. Because honestly, this is
where things can get very overwhelming.
Speaking from experience, it's very easy
to get paralyzed here. Even after
clustering, we have an abundance of
keyword ideas, but finite resources and
finite time. So, where do we begin?
Well, I've spent many a night banging my
head against the keyboard asking myself
this same question, and I've come out
the other side with this dead simple,
but proven framework. We start at the
bottom of the funnel, and we work
[music] our way upward. Here's the
three-step prioritization plan.
Step one, money pages
>> [music]
>> first. Now, these are the pages that
directly convert. Think product pages,
service pages, pricing pages, feature
[music] pages. The keywords behind them
are almost always transactional or
commercial. Proposal software for
agencies, buy espresso beans online,
cybersecurity assessment services. Now,
these pages are the foundation your
entire [music] site is built on. They're
what pay the bills. Without them, all
the traffic in the world really doesn't
matter.
See, a lot of brands go wrong by
starting with high-level blog posts
because they see that they get a lot of
search volume or maybe they're not very
competitive, so they write 10
informational articles and then they
wonder why nobody's buying. It's because
they neglected their money pages.
There's nowhere compelling for the
traffic to convert.
Step two is to pick a topical cluster
and to build it out. So, once your money
pages exist, you don't scatter your
content across 10 different topics. You
pick one cluster that connects to a
money page and you build the full funnel
for it. So, let me be crystal clear
here. In our money page stage, we go
wide. Oops, I just hit my mic. We build
a foundation across all topics, but now
we're narrowing in on one funnel and
building that up extensively. So, let me
give you an example. If our money page
is Counter Culture's subscription page,
which already ranks for coffee
subscription at 15,000 searches a month,
we'd build the funnel from bottom to top
like this. The money page is obviously
the subscription page itself. That's
transactional. That's what converts.
Someone searching coffee subscription is
ready to buy. One step up, we'd target
commercial intent keywords like best
coffee subscription or coffee
subscription box. Comparison content
where someone is weighing their options.
Now, Counter Culture writes a piece
showing why their subscription stands
out and links it back to the
subscription page. Then, at the top of
the funnel, we go educational. Counter
Culture already has a coffee basic
series covering brewing ratios, brewing
methods, grind size, tasting notes, and
single origin coffee. Every piece feeds
the one below it as well as internally
links to [music] other related posts
forming a traffic-generating web-like
powerhouse [music] we call a topic
cluster.
Now step three is to repeat cluster by
cluster. Finish one before starting the
next. I know it's tempting. So, one of
the early ways I learned to do SEO was
to get all your keywords in one big
list, sort them by lowest competition
and highest search volume, and then plug
away one by one down the list. So, for
PandaDoc, for example, that might mean
writing two blog posts on contract
management, then a comparison page on
e-signature tools, then you jump to an
unrelated guide on sales forecasting.
Now, that can work fine, but what you're
essentially doing is spreading yourself
thin across a bunch of topical clusters,
which could really prolong your ability
to see results in search. Here's the
thing, Google doesn't evaluate your page
in isolation. See, when someone searches
how to prevent ransomware attacks,
Google checks whether your site also
covers things like what is ransomware,
signs that your network has been
compromised, ransomware incident
response checklist. All of those live in
the same funnel. They're the same person
at different stages of the same problem.
So, if your site covers that full
journey, Google trusts you more on the
whole subject. Now, this is what SEOs
call topical authority. The more
comprehensively you cover a topic
cluster, the easier it becomes to rank
for every keyword in that cluster,
including the very competitive ones. So,
to review, the money pages come first
because they're the reason that the
content exists. They're the reason that
the whole business exists, really. Then,
you build out one cluster at a time.
Okay.
Now you know what to create, let's talk
about how to create it. Chapter four,
creating content that ranks. You've got
your keywords, your clusters, and a plan
for which funnel to target first. Now
you need to create content that actually
ranks. But before we go pen to paper,
or hands to keyboard, we need to do some
groundwork. I usually tackle content
creation in four phases. The first is
research. What already exists? What's
ranking for this keyword? And more
importantly, what are the competitors
missing that you could provide to make
your content as valuable as possible?
Next, structure. Build an outline that
matches the intent and covers the topic
thoroughly.
Third, we write. We draft content that
combines real expertise with
optimization, and lastly, we optimize.
We refine based on data, not guesswork.
Let's start with research.
Now before you write a single word, I
want you to open the top five results
for your target keyword. Read them.
All of them. I know that sounds tedious,
do it anyway.
You're looking for four things. Number
one is what topics do they cover? Those
are the table stakes. You have to cover
those, too.
But secondly, you want to look for what
they missed, cuz that's going to be your
opportunity, the gap that nobody's
filling.
Thirdly, you want to look at the average
length. This gives you a benchmark. You
don't need to match it exactly, but if
every top result for this keyword is
3,000 words, a big ultimate guide, and
you're writing 500, you're probably not
being comprehensive enough.
Also, what unique angles does anyone
take? This tells you where there's room
to differentiate. Now, there are ways to
automate this, but honestly, if I'm
teaching someone SEO, I recommend you do
this manually for your first few pieces
of content just to understand what it is
you're actually automating. After a
couple times, you will see just how
tedious this is, and
honestly, this was our life doing SEO in
the 2010s until Surfer came along. Now,
Surfer's content editor completely
automates this research. You enter your
keyword and it analyzes the top ranking
pages for you with topics they cover,
which terms appear most often, how
comprehensive the content needs to be.
It does in 60 seconds what would
manually take 20 minutes or more. Once
your research is done, it's time to
build an outline before you write. Do
not skip this step. Trust me, you will
save yourself so much grief. So, you can
feed research notes into Claude or
ChatGPT and ask it to draft an outline
structure. It usually gives me a solid
starting point, or you can create a
search-optimized outline straight from
Surfer with just a click, saving you
even more time and effort. All right, so
let's just get this out of the way now.
AI can write, like actually write really
well now. So, I found the most effective
way to use AI in your content writing
process is to let it handle the
structure, the scaffolding, the basic
definitions, research, and sentence flow
when things start to feel a little
clunky. Now, Surfer AI does this really,
really well because it's already
optimized against the top ranking pages
for your keyword. So, you're not
starting from a blank page. You're
starting from a search-informed draft.
But then you add what AI can't because
in a sea of AI slop, that's what's going
to stand out. I'm talking about things
like your experience. [music]
What actually happened when you try to
think. Your opinion. What you think is
overrated, underrated, or just plain
wrong. Original data. Your results. Your
experiments. Your case studies or your
conversations with customers.
Expert insights. This could be
interviews, quotes, proprietary
knowledge. And by the way, these don't
need to be from you. Like there's
nothing saying you can't source quotes
from experts on podcasts or YouTube
videos or books or scholarly journals.
Next, specific examples. So, real
businesses, real numbers, real case
studies, and real outcomes. [music]
Now, when it comes to making sure your
writing is both valuable to humans and
optimized for robots, the content editor
gives you a real-time content score from
zero to 100. It's tracking whether
you've covered the right topics, used
the right terms, and hit the right depth
for your keyword. This includes topical
coverage for both traditional search and
AI search. Now, I always aim to beat the
highest score on the dashboard. From
what I've seen, and Surfer's own data
backs this up, pages that clear that
threshold tend to rank better than pages
that don't. It turns the vague question
of is this comprehensive enough into a
number that you can actually chase. Now,
I can't overemphasize the role of a
thorough human touch in SEO content.
According to Ahrefs study of 14 billion
web pages, over 96%
get zero traffic from Google. I'm like,
96%?
Where are all these pages living?
The point is most content fails, not
because it's terrible, but because it's
the same as everything else. The bar
isn't just good. The bar is at least
five times better than what already
exists for this specific search. The
human-added layer looks different for
every business. For PandaDoc, it's
customer stories, workflow screenshots,
and free downloadable assets. For
Counter Culture, it's roasting
expertise, likely a lot of video
content, which is a great idea for
differentiation, by the way. Every
business has unique knowledge locked in
the heads of their people. And if for
some reason you don't, then find
expertise. Interview subject matter
experts. Find and comb through paper
books and scholarly journals. Go places
that AI spun content mills can't or
won't go to truly differentiate
yourself. That will be your SEO content
moat.
Now that your content exists, let's make
sure Google can read it.
Chapter five, on-page SEO.
Now on-page SEO is the technical stuff
that you do on each individual page to
help Google understand what it's about.
It's time to kind of shift from our
creative content writing mindset to a
detail-oriented
checklist mindset. I'll demonstrate this
with two real pages from Huntress, their
ransomware recovery guide and their
managed EDR product page. One's an
educational page and the other's a money
page. Same checklist, different
execution. The first and most important
element is your title tag. Include your
target keyword, keep it under 60
characters, and make it compelling
enough to click.
Huntress's recovery guide has the title
ransomware recovery guide for
businesses.
>> [music]
>> The keyword is front-loaded and it tells
you exactly what you're getting. Their
managed EDR page takes a different
approach.
>> [music]
>> End point detection and response built
for every business. It's still very
keyword rich, but also benefit-driven
because it's not just teaching, it's
[music] selling.
Next, your header tags. So, H1 is your
page title. You should have one per page
and I usually recommend it exactly
mirrors the title tag. [music]
H2s are your main sections and H3s are
subsections. Use your keywords naturally
in these. So, Huntress's ransomware
guide uses H1 for the title, then H2s
for each major section like what is
ransomware, first steps after a
ransomware attack, and building an
effective ransomware recovery strategy.
Now, under those H2s, they nest H3s like
why a ransomware recovery plan is
non-negotiable. Google and large
language models for that matter read
this hierarchy to understand the
structure [music] and depth of the page.
And not to mention, it also makes it a
whole lot easier for human readers to
skim the content and stay engaged. And I
mean, that's kind of the whole point,
right? I mean, at the end of the day, we
are writing for other human beings.
Right?
Right? Next, your URL structure. This
should be short, descriptive, and
include the keyword. Huntress uses
cybersecurity 101/topic/ransomware
recovery guide for the guide. It's
clean,
categorized, keyword rich. For the
product page, it's
Short and descriptive, it's all you
need. Compare either of those to a
string of random letters and numbers
that some CMSs have the bad habit of
outputting when you publish a page,
which tells Google and the searcher
absolutely nothing.
Next, your meta description. Now, this
is the snippet that appears under your
title in search results. 150 to 160
characters. It's not a direct ranking
factor, but it can affect whether or not
people click. Huntress's recovery guide
uses learn how to effectively recover
from ransomware attacks with our
comprehensive guide. Understand the
importance of a ransomware recovery
strategy and essential steps to minimize
impact. It's action-oriented, includes
the keyword, and tells the searcher
exactly what they'll get. Write it like
ad copy. Now, we get to one of the most
important aspects of on-page SEO, and
that is internal [music] linking. This
involves adding contextual links inside
the body copy of your content to other
relevant pages.
Remember those content clusters we
talked about? Internal links are how you
connect them. Huntress's ransomware
guide links to their ransomware
handbook, a blog post about Cowa Locker
ransomware, their cybersecurity
compliance solutions page, their managed
EDR product page, and their security
awareness training page. Every piece of
content links back to related content
and to the money pages. This is how
Google discovers your content and
understands how your pages relate to
each other.
Now, Surfer's content editor has an auto
internal links feature that handles this
for you. It scans your site and it
inserts the right internal links
automatically. I beg you, do not skip
this step. It can be super tempting to
just publish the page and get it out
there and then move on to the next
topic. But, internal linking has one of
the best effort-to-value ratios of any
SEO tactic.
Finally, we have image optimization.
Nothing crazy here. Descriptive file
names, alt text that describes what the
image shows, and compressed file sizes.
I really like the WebP format for this.
Huntress's managed EDR page uses alt
text like malicious process behavior and
ransomware canaries. Those are
decent alt tags, but I'd be a bit more
specific. Like you're describing the
image to a person who can't see it
because after all, people who use screen
readers, they depend on these alt tags.
Their ransomware guide, on the other
hand, repeats glitch effect for most
images. A missed opportunity. This goes
to show that even well-optimized sites
leave SEO on the table sometimes. Every
image is an opportunity to tell Google
what your page is about and to show up
in image search. So far, everything
we've covered is within your control.
Your keywords, your content, your
on-page optimization.
The next part isn't. And that's what
makes it hard.
Chapter six,
link building. Backlinks are links from
other websites to yours. Think of them
as votes of confidence. When a reputable
site links to your content, Google sees
that as a signal that your content is
trustworthy and valuable.
Now, not all links are created equal. A
link from a major industry publication
carries far more weight than a link from
a random web directory. Now, link
building is the hardest part of SEO,
full stop. It's time-consuming, it often
feels like cold outreach into the void,
and there are really no shortcuts that
don't eventually get you penalized. I
know some people may clown me for this,
but uh I'm a firm believer that if you
create genuinely great content, content
with original data, unique insights, or
practical tools, links come more
naturally than you'd think. Now, I'm not
against outreach or anything like that.
I'm actually a big fan of that. I'm just
saying in my experience building
websites and working with clients, the
best links have come from simply
creating something worth linking to.
But, I'm not just going to leave you
with that platitude. Here are some
practical ways to build quality links to
your site.
Tactic one is to be the source. This
means creating original data, original
analysis, or original resources that
journalists and bloggers will cite.
Counter Culture's pour-over brew guide
is linked to by WikiHow, Gear Patrol,
Breville, and dozens of coffee blogs
because, frankly, it's the most thorough
guide on the topic. Huntress's blog
posts on ransomware and data breaches
get cited by Google Cloud's threat
intelligence team and referenced on
Wikipedia. Every business is sitting on
knowledge that other people want to
reference. Most people just never
unearth it or publish it. Tactic two are
journalist query platforms. So, here's
what I want you to do. Sign up for
Source of Sources. It's free. It's
created by the original founder of HARO,
Help A Reporter Out, if any SEOs
remember that. Anyway, journalists post
queries when they need experts sources
for articles. You respond with quotes
and insights, and when they publish, you
get a link. This is the most accessible
link building tactic for beginners.
You're providing genuine expertise to
journalists who need sources. Takes
maybe 15 minutes a day to monitor. Now,
I will say this, it is a numbers game.
You might submit 100 inquiries or 100
requests for a link or 100 quotes and
only get one out of those. So,
keep at it and eventually you will get a
hit.
Tactic number three is to create
linkable assets.
Free tools, calculators, templates,
comprehensive guides, things that become
reference material for your industry.
Now, if your content is the definitive
resource on a topic, people link to it
because it makes their content better.
And thanks to tools like Claude Code and
Codex, it's never been easier for
non-technical marketers like me to vibe
code real, valuable browser-based tools.
For a recent Surfer video, I created a
fictional company called StockPath and
vibe coded an inventory calculator using
Claude Code. It took me 10 minutes and I
have nearly zero coding experience. But,
tools like these are massive backlink
magnets. Look at Counter Culture. They
already rank number one for pour-over
coffee ratio and cold brew ratio with
blog guides. But, coffee-to-water ratio
calculator gets 500 searches a month at
a keyword difficulty of eight. I mean, a
simple interactive calculator could
capture that traffic and earn links from
every coffee blog that currently
references their ratio guides. Counter
Culture,
you know where to find me. Actually, no.
Don't find me. I'm busy enough. If
you're just starting out, I don't want
you to obsess over link building yet. I
want you to focus on creating 10 to 15
great pieces of content first, then
start with tactic two, journalist
queries, because um it's free and you
can do it in 15 minutes a day.
Now, links will compound over time. Your
job right now is to build something
worth linking to. Chapter seven,
technical SEO. Now, technical SEO sounds
intimidating and it can be in some
cases. For large enterprise sites, it
can genuinely become a mess. But, if
you're running a small to medium
business on Webflow or WordPress or
Shopify or even a custom CMS, you're
probably 90% of the way there already.
Now, I could give you a long list of all
the technical things that you need to
do, but I'm just going to save both of
us a lot of time. I want you to download
Screaming Frog SEO Spider. It's free for
up to 500 URLs. You point it at your
site, it crawls every page, and it hands
you a prioritized list of technical
issues, broken links, missing title
tags, duplicate content, redirect
chains, images without alt text. Instead
of manually checking each page,
Screaming Frog does the audit for you in
minutes, tells you what to fix, and how
to fix it. One more thing, if you have a
physical location, like a store and
office, a restaurant, there's a whole
extra dimension called local SEO.
That's a huge topic that I can't get
into in this video, but I will say this,
if that's you, the most important thing
that you can do is claim your Google
Business Profile, fill out every field,
and get as many reviews as possible, as
well as respond to every review. That
alone can put you in the map results
when people search your category near
me. Maybe an idea for a future video.
The bottom line is if you're just
getting started, you probably don't need
to go down a technical SEO rabbit hole.
The technical stuff definitely matters,
but it's not what's holding most
beginners back. What's holding them back
is they simply haven't published
anything yet. Okay, everything I've
taught you so far, that's SEO as it's
existed for 20 years. What I'm about to
show you is what's changed.
Chapter 6, AI search, the new frontier.
Google alone processes over 5 trillion
searches a year, but there's a second
search engine now.
And no, I'm sorry, Bing.
It's not you.
I'm sorry, man.
I'm sorry, Bing.
Actually, there are several new search
engines,
and none of them are Bing. ChatGPT,
Gemini, Perplexity, Copilot, Claude,
Grok, Google AI mode, and who knows
whatever else is coming next. Maybe Bing
will release an AI and then I'll eat my
words. So, as I was editing, I
remembered that technically Copilot is
owned by Microsoft, which is also part
of Bing. But the fact that I didn't even
remember that tells you everything you
need to know about Bing's position in
the marketplace.
Seriously, Bing, I'm sorry. I was
rooting for you, man. People are asking
AI assistants for recommendations, like
what's the best CRM for small businesses
or recommend a project management tool.
What's the best way to learn SEO? And
these AI assistants are answering.
They're having a conversation. They're
recommending specific brands and
products and websites.
>> [music]
>> And if your business isn't showing up in
those answers, you're invisible in an
explosive new discovery channel. Watch
this. I'll ask ChatGPT, what's the best
proposal software for agencies? There's
PandaDoc. Best specialty coffee beans?
There's Counter Culture. What companies
can help me protect my network from
ransomware?
>> [music]
>> There's Huntress. Pause this video and
try this yourself. Open a fresh ChatGPT
window and ask a question your target
audience might ask during their buying
journey. Something that's likely to
trigger a brand name, and make sure
you're in an incognito browser, cuz
ChatGPT can be a little sneaky about
recognizing your preferences and feeding
you what it thinks you want to hear.
Now, whatever you see there, that is
your AI competition. Now, as you've
likely experienced in your personal
life, AI assistants don't present
information like Google, like a
hierarchical buffet of choices. Just
about all AI assistants are structured
to be more conversational. They
synthesize information from across the
web, and they generate an answer. They
cite sources, but they choose which
sources to cite based on authority,
>> [music]
>> relevance, and how clearly your content
answers the question. Now, here's the
good news. The same things that make you
rank well in Google, authoritative
content, clear structure, schema markup,
being cited by other sites, also help
your AI visibility. Good SEO [music]
is the foundation for both. Now, here's
a problem most people don't realize they
have. Google Search Console cannot see
traffic from ChatGPT or [music]
Perplexity. If someone finds your site
through an AI assistant, Search Console
doesn't register the visit. And frankly,
right now, nobody [music] has access to
what people are actually typing into AI
assistants. That data lives inside
OpenAI and Perplexity, and they're
certainly not sharing it. So, you can't
really track AI the same way you would
track Google searches. What you can do
is monitor whether your brand shows up
when those AI assistants answer
questions in your space. Surfer's AI
tracker does this. It runs queries
across ChatGPT, Gemini, and Perplexity,
and tracks which brands get recommended,
how that shifts over time, and where
your competitors are showing up and
you're not. It won't tell you how many
people found you through AI, but it will
tell you whether you're visible in those
channels at all. So, what can you
actually do to show up in AI search? If
you've been paying attention, you might
already see where this is going. First,
create comprehensive authoritative
content with clear subheadings and
direct answers to specific questions.
Large language models pull from content
they can parse easily, and that's
exactly what we built in chapter four.
Well-structured content with real
expertise isn't just good for Google,
it's what AI assistants site. Surfer's
Content Editor now includes an AI search
score alongside your regular content
score, so you can see whether your
content has the depth and structure that
AI assistants look for when deciding
what to site. Next, build topical
authority through clusters. When your
site covers a topic from every angle,
the definition, the how-to, the
comparison, the deep dive, AI models are
more likely to recognize your brand as
an authority on the subject. That's the
cluster strategy from chapter three.
Third, earn citations from other
authoritative sources. AI models weight
sources that other trusted sites
reference. Every backlink from a
reputable site signals to AI systems
that your content is worth citing. AI
assistants especially favor best-of
roundup articles, so getting your brand
placed in those or better yet, writing
them yourself, increases your chances of
getting surfaced in AI queries. Here's
how to find those opportunities. Surfer
has a mention gap report that shows you
which queries your competitors get cited
in, but you don't. Sort by highest
mentions, filter for the gaps, and
there's your outreach list. The specific
queries and articles where you need to
earn visibility. Combine that with the
outreach basics from chapter six, and
you've got a prioritized list of
citations to go earn. Check your AI
visibility regularly, manually or with a
tool like Surfer's AI tracker. AI
recommendations shift dramatically over
time. The brands that track it will
adapt. The ones that don't will wonder
why their competitors keep showing up
and they don't. If you haven't caught on
yet, all of these things are basically
just doing good SEO. AI search
optimization isn't a separate
discipline. It's what happens when you
do the fundamentals well and pay
attention to where the channels are
heading.
Okay. So, you just sat through a lot of
SEO strategy. That alone puts you ahead
of the people who skimmed a blog post
and called it a day. But knowing isn't
the same as doing. So, let's turn this
into action. This is going to be a
rapid-fire 30-day plan. Here we go. Week
one, foundation. Set up Google Search
Console. It's free and it's essential.
Set up Surfer or choose your tools and
do some keyword research. Find 10 to 15
target keywords using the keyword sweet
spot framework. Analyze search intent
for your top five keywords. Use the
30-second intent test. Identify your
money pages. Which pages on your site
directly convert visitors into
customers? Do they exist yet? Week two,
your most important money page. Write
and publish your single most important
money page or optimize an existing one.
Follow the content creation blueprint we
talked about in this video. Research,
structure, write, and optimize. Apply
the on-page checklist. Title, meta,
headers, internal links, and images.
This is the page that converts.
Everything else you build will link back
to this page. Additional money pages are
an ongoing priority, not a one-week
sprint. Week three, your first funnel.
Pick one topical cluster connected to
your money page. Publish a mid-funnel or
top-of-funnel piece that supports it.
Internally link it to your money page
and other related pages. If you already
have content on your site, don't just
create new pages. Sometimes updating a
page that's already ranking on page two
or three is faster than writing it from
scratch. Now we're in week four, promote
and monitor. Start responding to
journalist queries on source-of-sources
or featured.com, 15 minutes a day. Check
your AI visibility, either manually or
with Surfer's AI tracker. Review Google
Search Console for early signals. Here's
what you're looking for. Impressions
rising, even if clicks aren't yet. New
keywords appearing. Position trending
from page five to page three, say. Next,
plan your next cluster, not your next
random topic. Remember, SEO is a long
game. You probably won't see results in
30 days, but after 30 days, you'll have
the foundation, the right keywords,
optimized content, and a system for
creating more. That's further than 95%
of businesses just spraying and praying
with AI slop content ever get. So, that
is SEO in the AI era.
Find what people search for, create the
best content for that search, earn
trust.
The fundamentals haven't changed in 20
years. What's changed is how the same
work now makes you visible in Google, in
AI overviews, in ChatGPT, and in
perplexity.
I said it at the beginning, and I'll say
it again. SEO is not competing with AI
search. It's the foundation AI search is
built on. If this was useful, subscribe.
And if you want to try Surfer, the link
is in the description. You can start
with the free keyword Surfer extension
and go from there.
Thanks for watching, and happy ranking.